% open pi musi Conlang Critic
% gregdan3
% 07-04-2022

This is an adaptation of a short lesson I gave in the kama sona server.

The opening to Conlang Critic is short, punchy, and comedic. Can we replicate
that in Toki Pona? Absolutely.

First, the original text:

> Welcome to Conlang Critic, the show that gets facts wrong about _your_
> favorite conlang!

And this is followed by jan Misali's self introduction.

## Specific translations

#### Welcome

Welcomes are simple! They are usually expressed as an instruction using "o",
and ended with "pona" to express the well-wishing nature of the instruction.
Otherwise, a welcome is a kind of arrival, so we can use "kama": "o kama pona"

You can also use the preposition "tawa" to express where you're welcoming
somebody to, so "o kama pona tawa ..."

#### Conlang Critic

Conlang Critic could be a proper noun with a capital letter name, or you could
translate it. In either case, jan Misali says it's a show, and a show is
entertainment, which is musi. If you use a proper noun, your job is done here:
"musi Conlang Critic", or whatever adaptation you prefer. You can do a little
better when you zoom in on "Conlang Critic" though!

#### Conlangs

Conlang, short for constructed language, could be described as both a pali
(creation) and as a toki (language). This is an important decision when
deciding translations: which one is more important, and becomes the head noun?
Here, we'll say that a constructed language is a "language" before it is
"constructed". But since both work, we can call it a "toki pali."

#### Critics

As for critic, we don't need to translate it as a single phrase; critics do one
thing: talk about a subject. Let's make that a separate sentence! Our speaker
will call themselves "mi", and will "toki". It is relatively common to say you
talk "about" something as "jan li toki **lon** ijo", so we'll reuse that here,
but be aware that there are more ways to translate this too.

#### Favorites

When describing their preferences, most people refer to things being "pona tawa
mi", good to them. A favorite is something that is the most good, or you might
say first place in goodness! We can say that this is "nanpa wan", which can
apply to any property: "ni li pona nanpa wan tawa mi". So now we know our
critic will talk about "toki pali sina nanpa wan", your favorite conlang!

#### Facts, Wrongness

Facts and wrongness often have to do with "lon" and "lon ala" respectively.
"lon" deals with truth, so we could have our critic will speak in an untruthful
way: "toki pi lon ala". Let's try it!

## Putting it together

#### Attempt #1

Here's the two halves of the opener we've made so far. Translations are under
the spoilers.

<details> <summary> o kama pona tawa musi mi! mi toki lon toki pali. </summary>
Welcome to my entertainment! I talk about created languages. </details>

<details> <summary> toki sina nanpa wan la musi ni li toki pi lon ala!
</summary> In the context of your favorite language, this entertainment tells
lies! </details>

Looking good so far! You'll notice that in the second sentence, we refer to
only "toki sina nanpa wan" instead of "toki pali sina nanpa wan". This is
because we've already introduced the fact that the critic is going to talk
about "toki pali". From there, the only kind of "toki" that would be reasonable
to mean would be other "toki pali."

Except there's still one problem: that's not quite the original meaning! "toki
pi lon ala" definitely captures the idea of _lying_, but the statement actually
says they're getting facts _wrong_, jokingly, about your favorite conlang.
We've translated the idea of being wrong correctly; in the process, we've
translated it too literally. The intended meaning is about making mistakes,
which is more like "pakala"! Let's try again:

#### Attempt #2

The first half was already great, so here's the edited second half:

<details> <summary> toki sina nanpa wan la, musi ni li toki pakala! </summary> 
In the context of your favorite language, this entertainment speaks mistakenly!
</details>

## Conclusion

The process of translation, especially into Toki Pona, can never be one-to-one.
You make compromises, subtle changes, artistic and informational decisions,
throughout the entire dialog. The skills that will help you most are
recognizing the objects and actions of a sentence, and breaking those down
individually without the rest of the sentence. This will get faster over time
too, until you're no longer thinking about it!

---

Also, I recorded the final result. Enjoy!

<audio controls src="/sound/conlangcritic.mp3"> </audio>

---

[Back home](/toki-pona/)
