% palin't
% gregdan3
% 2022-07-30

#### Summary

`pali` doesn't mean "do", just "work" or "create".

## palin't

This small nasin is interesting enough to document because it changes an
existing word, rather than outright adding or removing words or grammatical
behaviors.

palin't is named weirdly. Unlike other `n't` nasin, this one does use pali. But
it doesn't use one meaning of pali: "to do". This way, pali only means to
create or to work, [among a few other related
definitions](https://lipu-linku.github.io/?q=pali). Keep in mind, it can still
mean any kind of creating or working, which overlap with "do".

This distinction is sometimes subtle. Both working and creating are kinds of
doing, but "to do" is more broad than both. You can think of this removing
pali's most generic meaning. The primary consequence of this is changing a
common conversation starter:

> sina pali e seme?

This is taught as a greeting to learners, to mean "What are you doing?". It
works given pali's "do" meaning, but without that meaning, this statement is
more like "What are you working on?" or "What are you creating?".

Still, remember that "to do" is a pu usage of the word pali, and will be
understood by most Toki Pona speakers. But the use of pali as "to do" is
falling out of popularity over time, even with pu using "sina pali e seme" as
an example greeting.

On that note, I recommend these conversation starters instead:

> sina seme?

"What are you doing?" in Toki Pona's most common nasin. Could also be "What
describes you?", or "What kind of 'you' are you?" if taken literally. For
comparison, "jan seme" asks the same questions: "What describes this person?"
or "What kind of person?"

> seme li lon?

Literally, "What exists?". Figuratively, "What is happening?" or "What's up?".
This is also my personal favorite.

> seme li sin?

Similarly to "seme li lon", this asks what is _new_ rather than what _exists_.

I encourage you to be as curious as you want as well, and use any conversation
starter! Ask about somebody's week, or their favorite hobby. Ask about a trip
they want to go on. There are interesting topics in every direction; be
excited!
