% nanpa tenpo: Units of Time
% gregdan3
% 2022-07-31

Check out my live lesson [here](https://youtu.be/dP3QFNKQB9A), and catch other live lessons [here](https://discord.com/invite/acN3PD5y7M)!

---

New learners often struggle with early Toki Pona usage due to Toki Pona lacking
units of time. Many advanced speakers will say that you eventually do not need
specific units of time, or most math, and I've found this to be true as well.
But I also find it unhelpful; units of time and mathematical concepts are
important tools in language, and at that, the process of teaching how to
reference these in Toki Pona is just as helpful as recognizing the unimportance
of specific numbers in Toki Pona.

This lesson is intended to cover that knowledge gap. How _do_ you reference
specific amounts of time in Toki Pona?

Each minor section references a tool that can be used to reference specific
amounts of time.

## Small Times

#### Analogue Clocks

introduction: how fast each moves compared to time

small stick, hours

big stick, minutes

thin stick, seconds (if present)

numbering each for ease of reference

#### Digital Clocks

introduction: how often each changes compared to time

#### Other Phenomena

TODO

## Big Times

#### Sunrises, Sunsets

#### Calendars

#### Phases of the Moon

#### Seasons

#### Lifetimes

---

Take these for example: There isn't a word for discrete units of time like
hour/min/second in toki pona. BUT the objects that count these times are
frequently available, digital and analogue clocks. If you have an analogue
clock, you can reference a time by describing what happens to the clock in the
timeframe you want: "palisa lili pi ilo tenpo li tawa sike tu la, o kama" ->
"When the small stick of the time tool travels in a circle twice, arrive." The
same can be said of a digital clock: "nanpa wan pi ilo tenpo li ante tu la, o
kama" -> "When the first number of the time tool changes twice, arrive."

There's also a fun example of this with a Gregorian calendar. tenpo esun and
tenpo pali are relatively common ways to refer to a week, but both have
different faults that make them not very good at this job. If you have a
calendar present, you can note: "tenpo esun en tenpo pali li tenpo suno tu tu
tu wan. taso lon lipu tenpo la tenpo ni li palisa lukin. ni la ona li tenpo
palisa." -> "Shopping-time and working-time are seven sun times. But on a time
document, this time is stick-looking. Because of this, it is a stick time."
Taken literally: on most calendars, a week is arranged from left to right.
Taken as a unit, it's a stick. stick time!

I am not familiar with the lunar calendar. But this should be a good reference
point for getting other time systems into toki pona: describing the properties
of a system that DOES track time how you want, with the specificity you want.

---

[Back home](/toki-pona/)
